---
layout: post
title: Working For Peanuts and Wisdom
categories: [general]
tags: [django, python, work]
fullview: false
comments: true
---

## A retrospective of my first-ever job in the IT sector.

I'll present a brief timeline of events and then dig into the technological parts.

I recently finished a 15 month job as a full-stack web developer for a non-profit organization part of my university.

I started in January 2015 as an intern for an optional eight month work as part of my undergraduate program. The senior developer there was the only other programmer on staff so he would end up being my boss, team-mate, and mentor for my time there.

Or so I thought.

About 3 months after I was hired this senior developer decided to leave for greener pastures (ie; the university hardly paid him anything, and me even less) so I was left to captain a major part of a 7 million dollar project. This is how a 3rd year Computer Science undergrad with only a few months of basic exposure to web development came to hold the job title of "Full-Stack Web Developer/Senior Systems Analyst." As one might expect, I felt as though I was under a lot of pressure.

Luckily, my boss was a very understanding woman who knew I would need extra time to learn things before I got my tasks done. In case you're wondering why they didn't just hire another developer: a lot of the heavy lifting for the project was done about 6 months before I started and I was already pushing against our portion of the budget by being paid $14.65/hour. That left us with very little wiggle room.

Nothing particularly eventful happened for the next 4-5 months except that my boss took a one month vacation in July and left me to my own devices with no input or guidance. It was during this time that I decided I wanted to be a freelance web developer but that's actually a different story.

So we arrive at late August. My work term contract was just about up and there was still a couple of major pieces of development left. Which meant I held the immediate fate of the project in my hands. They didn't have the money to pay another developer industry wages and I was the only one capable of doing any programming or web design. They pretty much had no choice but to extend my contract until December of that year (one semester).

During this semester I was also back to taking classes and working half as many hours so development was a little slower. It was slowed even further still by new demands being made each week which I needed to research and provide time estimates for. This lead to my contract being extended yet another semester until April 2016.

Which brings us to now. As I said, my formal salaried contract has actually ended this time (after a bit of me scrambling to plug last-minute leaks) but I've been re-hired on a freelance basis indefinitely where I work as-needed to implement very small features or fix bugs.

That's actually a very brief summary with some details omitted. But to write the full story of what happened over the last year would require more motivation (read: hard liquor) than I have at my disposal.

But let's get into the more relevant details: **programming!**

The project had been built on a foundation of Python, the Django web framework, Foundation for the frontend structure, and all the other standard fixins (JavaScript, CSS, etc.) Oh, and an Apache2 web server. Which is the first and last time you'll ever hear me talk about Apache server software.

Of course, being a legacy project, every single dependency was outdated by at least a year. <sup><sup><sup>python 2 ahoy!</sup></sup></sup>

But, this was the job that introduced me to the glory that is Django and for that I'm grateful.

I had had a little bit of experience with Python at this point, having done a University course in data analysis with Python about a year earlier. But I hadn't yet gained an appreciation for the language and what it was capable of. I won't go on about the incredible simplicity-of-use of Python whilst also being extremely versatile and powerful, nor it's gorgeous syntax, nor it's "batteries-included" philosophy. You'll read about me drooling over the language in later posts.

One other important thing to mention is that I only had experience using Java at this point. And Python most certainly is not Java.

Diving right into a complicated Django project was confusing to say the least. My senior co-worker (while he was still there) knew this and gave me really simple tasks to start out with. At the same time, I was working my way through the fantastic online book [How To Tango With Django](http://www.tangowithdjango.com/). I finished the book on my own time in about a week and I was pretty confident in my Django abilities. I was amazed at how easy and fairly intuitive it was to use and get a website up and running.

As I worked more and more with the code base and learned the intricacies of Django I slowly realized one thing: this entire project is a mess. 
The first thing is that was ***completely undocumented.*** I would frequently ask my co-worker "what does this code do?" and would be met with "I have no idea, never seen it before." But he's the one who wrote it two months before and didn't comment anything so now we've got a partially functioning view and nobody knows what it does. Great.
The other major issue; ever seen a database that was severely non-normalized? You know, one table filled with redundant data that really should be split into several? Well it this database had (still has) that exact opposite issue. It was normalized beyond recognition. I'm talking separate tables for first and last names, it was that bad. There were (still are) many-to-one keys everywhere when there needed to be many-to-many so half the associated tables can't even be referred to each without going into a cyclical dependency loop.
The ultimate display of irony is that my co-worker lent me his copy of "Two Scoops of Django: Best Practices for Django 1.6." I simply sat there in awe.
Unfortunately, I am just one man and still a university student at that. I know exactly what's wrong with the project and I know how to fix it but I severely lack the time and the organization lacks the funds. 

Anyway, this post is getting longer than I intended and I don't want it to turn into a rant.This is my first "real" post on this blog and I hope it's the first of many. 

Thanks for reading.


